Ashworth College is a for-profit online college based in Norcross, Georgia. It operates subsidiary schools Madison School of Healthcare, PCDI Canada, and James Madison High School.


== History ==

Since its founding in 1987, Professional Career Development Institute (PCDI) has developed a large selection of distance-learning programs and has enrolled more than 2 million students in its high school, career, and degree programs.
James Madison High School (JMHS) was established in 1996 to aid students who need an alternative approach to a high school education. JMHS provides the curriculum needed for students to complete one to four years of high school course work leading to a high school diploma.
In 2000, PCDI established Ashworth College to offer associate degree programs to students who need a relaxed approach to a college education. Ashworth College started offering master’s degree programs in 2004 and bachelor’s degree programs in 2007.
In 2007, all schools under PCDI merged under the Ashworth College umbrella.In May 2016 the Federal Trade Commission and Ashworth College entered a settlement in which the college agreed to alter its advertising claims. The commission had charged the college with deceptively marketing its online college degree and career-training programs; it stated that some Ashworth programs failed to meet the basic educational requirements set by state licensing boards for careers or jobs such as real estate appraisers, home inspectors, elementary school educators and massage practitioners. The commission also claimed that the college's credits were represented as fully transferable, although it lacked supporting data that other colleges and universities would accept their credits.


== Academics ==
Ashworth offers 3 high school programs, 10 career certificates, over 60 career diplomas, 15 undergraduate certificates, 30 associate degree programs, 8 bachelor's degree programs, 6 graduate certificates, and 10 master's degree programs. Its programs are non-synchronous and can be started at any time.


=== Accreditation and licensing ===
Ashworth College is nationally accredited by the Distance Education Accrediting Commission. The RN to BSN program is accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE) and the associate degree in veterinary technician program is accredited by the  American Veterinary Medical Association  (AVMA) Committee on Veterinary Technician Education and Activities (CVTEA). Ashworth College is also authorized by the Georgia Nonpublic Postsecondary Education Commission to offer instruction in career programs, undergraduate certificates, associate degree, bachelor's degree, and master's degree programs.Although Ashworth College is nationally accredited only by the DEAC, not a regional agency, it does operate James Madison High School, which is regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Council on Accreditation and School Improvement.


=== Ashworth Community ===
The Ashworth College Community gives students the opportunity to participate in online study groups, clubs and organizations and receive tutorial assistance, career advice and student support. Students connect through discussion threads, email, chat and webinars. The Ashworth College student body includes students from all 50 states and many countries.


== Admissions and financial aid ==
To be accepted to Ashworth College, students must be at least 16 years old or have an enrollment form filled out by a parent or guardian. College degrees require a high school diploma or a GED to enroll. Many career diplomas and certificate courses have no prerequisites. Ashworth College does not accept or offer federal or financial aid or provide student loans, claiming that this is due to their mission to make the tuition affordable to all.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website