Bagets: Just Got Lucky is an afternoon youth-oriented television show in the Philippines that is produced by Viva Television and developed by TV5. It is a remake of the 1984 films Bagets and Bagets 2.


== Synopsis ==
Bagets centers on a story of young individuals coming from different backgrounds and co-existing in a campus despite their class differences and clashing personalities. These interesting characters include school rivals Ace (AJ Muhlach) and Georgina (Nadine Lustre), who bring out the best and the worst of each other through their competition. Ace is a friendly athletic scholar who is popular in school due to his academic and extra-curricular activities while Georgina is a working student and a campus leader who is not afraid to speak her mind. Meanwhile, competing with Ace for George's attention is a rich kid named Jules (Josh Padilla), who is popular with the girls because of his good looks, charm, and affluence. Jules’ confidence, however, sometimes borders on arrogance.
There is also the “kikay” girl Gayle (Shy Carlos) who stalks “emo” guy JC (Rico dela Paz). The two will eventually discover and appreciate their individualities more than their differences. On the other hand, Santi (Johan Lourens), who comes from an affluent family, is linked to social climber and poser Tara (Eula Caballero). When Santi falls in love with Tara, she gets caught between her lies and revealing her true feelings to Santi. Last but not least, the boy-loves-girl and the girl-hates-boy type of relationship between Hiro (Aki Torio) and Liezl (Meg Imperial) will definitely stir up the story of the exciting Bagets series.


== Cast ==


=== Main Cast ===
The BoysAJ Muhlach as Ace Delgado
Johan Laurens as Santi Pecson
Rico dela Paz as JC Enriquez
Aki Torio as Hiro Galura
Josh Padilla as Jules SorianoThe GirlsNadine Lustre as Georgina George Evangelista
Shy Carlos as Gayle Fresnido
Eula Caballero as Tara Montes
Imee Hart as Hannah Fresnido
Meg Imperial as Liezl RubioCampus BulliesMartin Velayo as Matthew Matty Pineda (Mama's Boy)
Julian Calderon as Julian Roxas
Lucas Zamora as MacThe Mean GirlsMariel Bitanga as Mandy
Joan Singh as Simone Luis "The IT Girl"
Coraleen Waddell as Sachi


=== Supporting Cast ===
Raymond Lauchengco as Ariel
Cheska Inigo as Santi's Mother
Aifha Medina as Miss KC
Almira Muhlach as Leizl's Mother
Bernadette Allyson as Ace's Mother
Biboy Ramirez as JC's Father
Candy Pangilinan as Hiro's Mother
Dingdong Avanzado as George's Father
Ella Guevara as Hiro's Sister
Jao Mapa as Jules and Ace Father
Jef Gaitan as Miss Jelai
Joy Viado as Principal Subong
LJ Moreno as JC's Mother
Nikita McElroy as Hiro's Sister
Erika Padilla as Tara's Sister
Dino Imperial as Dustin Herrera
CJ Jaravata as Gayle and Hannah's Mother


== See also ==
List of programs broadcast by TV5


== References ==