Bellisio Foods Incorporated (formerly Michelina's) is a diversified American frozen food manufacturer based in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Founded by food industry pioneer Jeno Paulucci in Duluth, Minnesota, the company is named after Paulucci's familial home in Italy, Bellisio Solfare. The company is now owned by Charoen Pokphand Foods Public Company Limited of Thailand. Its products are primarily sold in the United States but are also distributed in over 12 countries worldwide, which includes Canada, Australia, Russia and China. As the third-largest producer of frozen entrées in the United States, the company has a daily production capacity of over two million meals.Today, the company markets more than 400 products spanning across a wide variety of categories. These include single-serve and multi-serve entrees, snacks, side dishes and specialty sauces. While most of Bellisio's products are branded, the company also manufactures private label and co-pack retail products. Some of Bellisio's co-pack products are sold under the Chili's, Boston Market and Zatarain's brand names. Some of Bellisio’s brands are Michelina’s, Michelina’s Lean Gourmet, Michelina’s Budget Gourmet, Fusion Culinary, Arden Kitchens, Chariton and Howlin’ Coyote.
Fusion Culinary Center, a wholly owned subsidiary of Bellisio based in Lakeville, Minnesota, conducts research and development for many national restaurant chains. Bennigan's Grill and Tavern recently named Fusion its "Vendor of the Year" for their culinary work.Originally produced in Duluth, Bellisio’s products now ship from its facility in Jackson, Ohio. R&D functions operate out of Lakeville. Duluth still handles portions of the packaging and financial departments. The executive offices of Bellisio are located in Minneapolis.


== Acquisitions ==
On June 16, 2013, Bellisio purchased APC Foods, located in Austin, Minnesota, for $6.1 million. APC was for sale after its owners recently filed for receivership to avoid filing a federal bankruptcy.Also in 2013, Overhill Farms Inc., a frozen foods manufacturer based in Vernon, California, was acquired by the company for approximately $80 million.Bellisio was purchased by Thailand food conglomerate Charoen Pokphand Foods in 2016 for $1.08 billion.


== References ==


== External links ==
Bellisio Foods Corporate Website