Caner Cindoruk (born 02 April 1980) is a Turkish theater, cinema and television actor.


== Life and career ==
Caner Cindoruk was born on 02 April 1980 in Adana. His mother is Müşerref, and his father is the story writer Zafer Doruk, a two times recipient of Orhan Kemal Story Award.He has two siblings, Münir Can Cindoruk and Taner Cindoruk, and first became interested in theater under the influence of his family. His uncle, Erdal Cindoruk, is a theater actor. Cindoruk's childhood years were spent in the backstage of theaters. He always found a work on stage at his middle school and high school, and appeared in a number of plays at his university years. He is a graduate of Çukurova University State Conservatory Theater Department. His first professional role was the character of Yusuf on the play Fehim Paşa Konağı. In 1997, he made his professional debut at the Adana Seyhan Municipality Theater Group. He worked as an actor at the Seyhan Municipality and Adana City Theater for ten years.In 2006, he moved to Istanbul with four of his childhood friends. He had his cinematic debut in the same year with a role in the movie Beynelmilel. His cast-mates included the actor Özgü Namal. In 2008, Cindoruk appeared in the movie Kelebek. In 2007, with his role on Kara Güneş he had his first television experience and the next year appeared in the series Geç Gelen Bahar and Yaprak Dökümü. His portrayal of the character Doctor Nazmi in Yaprak Dökümü earned him critical acclaim. In the summer of 2009, Cindoruk was cast in an adaptation of one of Orhan Kemal's works, titled Hanımın Çiftliği, and acted opposite Mehmet Aslantuğ and Özgü Namal.In 2012, together with Ebru Özkan, he appeared in the play Pandaların Hikayesi. In the same year, he was cast in Bahman Ghobadi's Gergedan Mevsimi alongside Yılmaz Erdoğan, Beren Saat and Monica Bellucci. In 2015, he appeared in Iraqi director Hiner Saleem's movie, Dar Elbise, alongside Tuba Büyüküstün, Hazar Ergüçlü, İnanç Konukçu, Devrim Yakut and Canan Ergüder. The movie was released in 2016.Caner Cindoruk portrayed the character of Tulumbacı Eğrikapılı Ali in the musical İstanbulname, produced by Türker İnanoğlu. He shared the leading role with Nükhet Duru, Pelin Akil, Cezmi Baskın and Kayhan Yıldızoğlu.With his role in Zeki Demirkubuz's movie Kor, Caner Cindoruk received critical acclaim from critics. His cast-mates in the movie were Aslıhan Gürbüz and Taner Birsel. In 2016, Cindoruk and Gizem Karaca were cast as the leading roles of the series İstanbul Sokakları.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
IMDb profile