Christopher Caldwell (born 1962) is an American journalist and a former senior editor at The Weekly Standard, as well as a regular contributor to the Financial Times and Slate. He is a senior fellow at the Claremont Institute and contributing editor to The Claremont Review of Books. His writing also frequently appears in The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, where he is a contributing editor to the paper's magazine, and The Washington Post. He was also a regular contributor to The Atlantic Monthly and The New York Press and the assistant managing editor of The American Spectator.


== Early life and education ==
Caldwell was born in Lynn, Massachusetts, and is a graduate of Harvard College, where he studied English literature.


== Career ==
Caldwell's 2009 book Reflections on the Revolution In Europe, which deals with increased Muslim immigration to Europe, received mixed reactions. The Economist newspaper called it "an important book as well as a provocative one: the best statement to date of the pessimist’s position on Islamic immigration in Europe." The Marxist historian Perry Anderson, though critical of his arguments, nonetheless called it "the most striking single book to have appeared, in any language, on immigration in Western Europe". Others were more blunt, accusing Caldwell of stoking what The Guardian referred to as a "culture of fear". Caldwell insists that he is "instinctively pro-immigration" and conscious of the media tendency to "sensationalize stories against Muslims".In 2020 he published The Age of Entitlement: America Since the Sixties, in which he argues that the civil rights movement has had significant unintended consequences: "Just half a decade into the civil rights revolution, America had something it had never had at the federal level, something the overwhelming majority of its citizens would never have approved: an explicit system of racial preference. Plainly the civil rights acts had wrought a change in the country’s constitutional culture." Caldwell writes that the Civil Rights Act 1964 was "not just a major new element in the Constitution," but "a rival constitution, with which the original one was frequently incompatible." It was reviewed in the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal. The WSJ wrote "It's curious that a book subtitled 'America Since the Sixties' doesn’t actually have much history in it." Jonathan Rauch wrote of Caldwell's book, "If you think Caldwell sounds like Bannon, the self-appointed tribune of Trumpian working-class populism, you’re right."


== Personal life ==
His wife Zelda is the daughter of journalist Robert Novak. Caldwell has five children. His daughter Lucy Caldwell is the Campaign Manager for Joe Walsh's presidential campaign challenging Donald Trump for the Republican nomination in 2020.


== Books ==
Left Hooks, Right Crosses: A Decade of Political Writing (Nation books), edited by Christopher Hitchens and Christopher Caldwell. Perseus. 2002. ISBN 978-1-56025-409-6
Reflections on the Revolution In Europe: Immigration, Islam, and the West. London, Allen Lane. 2009. ISBN 978-0-7139-9936-5
The Age of Entitlement: America Since the Sixties. Simon & Shuster. 2020. ISBN 978-1501106897
 Une révolution sous nos yeux, comment l'Islam va transformer la France et l'Europe, préface de Michèle Tribalat, éditions du Toucan, octobre 2011. ISBN 978-2-8100-0444-7


== References ==


== External links ==
Financial Times bio
The Financial Times Author archive.
Appearances on C-SPAN