Fordham Preparatory School (also known as Fordham Prep) is a private, Jesuit, all-male high school located in the Bronx, New York City, with an enrollment of approximately 1,000 students. It is located on the Rose Hill campus of Fordham University.


== History ==
The Fordham Preparatory School, formerly known as St. John's Preparatory School until St. John's College was renamed Fordham University, was founded in 1841.
Once integrated into the university as the "lower division," Fordham Prep was located in Hughes Hall from 1890 until it moved to its own facilities when it formally separated from the university in 1972.  Located on the northwest corner of the Rose Hill campus, Fordham Prep's main building, Shea Hall, was completed in 1972.  The addition of Maloney Hall, including the Hall of Honor, intramural gym, fitness center, and Leonard Theatre was completed in 1995.  The theatre is the venue for the school's Drama Society and is used for school assemblies as well as by Fordham University on various occasions.  It has twice hosted the MSNBC nightly news program, Hardball with Chris Matthews.
Recently, Fordham Prep completed its third-floor renovation and fourth-floor expansion.  Opened in September 2009, the Boller Science Center on the fourth floor features three new chemistry and three new biology laboratories, as well as a greenhouse.  The third floor was renovated to include six new classrooms and three new physics laboratories.
Over the Summer of 2017, Fordham Prep completed the construction of the new school chapel, located on the third floor, along with a renovation of the lobby and front entrance.
Over the Summer of 2018, Fordham Prep completed the renovation of the first floor locker room along with renovations of the modern language classrooms.


== Academics ==
Fordham Prep has a liberal arts curriculum which focuses on English, history, mathematics, the sciences, ancient and modern languages, and religious studies.  Students are given the option to take Honors or Advanced Placement classes depending on their individual performance. All freshmen take a classical language: Latin or Ancient Greek. As they move on to their sophomore year, the students can choose to continue with Latin or Greek, study a modern foreign language such as Spanish, French, Italian,  Mandarin Chinese, Arabic or German, or take both a modern and classical language. All students are required to take four years of English, four years of Religion, four years or three levels of any language, three years of history, three years of mathematics, and three years of science. Senior students have the choice of taking elective courses, and with prior approval, undergraduate courses at Fordham University. Seniors are also required to plan and implement a senior service project at an approved site. They then reflect on their service and journal their experiences for a senior service essay to be completed at the end of the year. Fordham Prep contains a generally academically gifted student body, by drawing from a large amount of the tri-state area, and maintaining a 1:2 admission to application rate.
Fordham Prep's 1 to 1 program integrates personal computers with course materials.  Every student owns a tablet, on which they take notes, read handouts, and complete homework.  Students can download assignments and course material for every class using Schoology.


== Service ==
Students must fulfill community service requirements of 15 hours in junior year and 70 hours in senior year.
Each summer, Fordham Prep sponsors Service Immersion Trips. The destinations include the Romero Center in Camden, New Jersey, and  Habitat for Humanity in Robbins, Tennessee, and the Boys and Girls Club in Quito, Ecuador.


== Extracurricular activities ==
Fordham Prep has many extracurricular activities for students. There are over fifty clubs, each pertaining to a specific interest. There are clubs for students who enjoy computers, marine biology, music, politics, etc. There are also the Asian, Irish, Italian and Spanish clubs. The Prep has a successful Speech and Debate Team. The team competes on state and national levels in Lincoln-Douglas Debate, Public Forum Debate, Student Congress, Extemporaneous Speaking, Declamation, Duo Interpretation, and other forms of dramatic interpretation of literature.  The Dramatics Society puts on two shows a year in the Leonard Theater.
In addition, there are several student-produced publications that are released throughout the year.  The school newspaper, Rampart, and the political science journal, The Objective, are printed on a monthly basis.  Labyrinth, the literary arts magazine, is circulated twice a year.  The Prep has published a yearbook, Ramkin, since 1929.
In the school's aviation club, students practice advanced maneuvers on the club's flight simulator and prepare to earn their private pilot license.


== Athletics ==
Fordham Prep also has a large number of athletic teams. It is a member of the CHSAA. Fordham Prep's own track and practice field were refurbished with MONDO and true grass respectively. The track is named in honor of one of the Prep's track coaches, Joe Fox. Fordham Prep has several competitive teams in soccer, baseball (CHSAA champions 2009), football, ice hockey (CHSAA Champions 2006 and 2007), basketball,  swimming and diving (CHSAA champions 2006–2015 and New York State Champions '11, '12, '13, '14, '15), golf (CHSAA Champions '98, '02, '06, '08, '09, '11, '12, '14, '17, '18), lacrosse, cross country, track and field, tennis, wrestling,  bowling, volleyball, and  rowing (New York State Champion in Men's 8+ 2015, 2016, 2017).
On March 13, 2009, the 4x55m shuttle hurdle relay team set a new national high school record (29.15 sec.) while winning the Indoor National Championship.
The school's primary sports rival is considered to be Xavier High School in Manhattan.  The two schools' football teams play each other every year in the "Turkey Bowl".  Dating to 1882, the game is considered New York City's oldest sports rivalry.
The school's team name is the Rams.


== Notable alumni ==
Robert Abplanalp (1940) – Inventor of the aerosol valve and founder of Precision Valve Corporation
Joseph Bastianich (1985) – Winemaker and restaurateur, also a judge on the television series MasterChef
Esteban Bellan (1868) – First Latin American professional baseball player
Arthur Daley (1922) – The New York Times sports columnist and Pulitzer Prize winner for journalism
Joseph J. DioGuardi (1958) – U.S. Congressman
J. Hunter Guthrie (1917) – Jesuit philosopher and president of Georgetown University
Pete Fornatale (1963) – Disk jockey and music historian
Frankie Frisch (1916) –  Major League Baseball Hall of Famer, also known as "The Fordham Flash"
Mario Gabelli (1961) – CEO and founder of Gabelli Asset Management
Robert Hackett (1977) – Silver medalist in Swimming at the 1976 Summer Olympics
John Halligan (1959) – New York Rangers public relations director and NHL executive
John Holland (2006) – Professional basketball player
Walter P. Kellenberg (1901–1986) – Bishop of Rockville Center
Walter Kinsella (1900–1975) – Actor
John L. Lahey (1964) – President of Quinnipiac University
Theodore Edgar McCarrick (1949) – Archbishop of Washington D.C.
Horace McKenna, S.J. (1916) – founder of S.O.M.E. (So Others Might Eat) and advocate of the Sursum Corda Cooperative
Joseph Moglia (1967) – CEO of Ameritrade
Johnny Murphy (1925) – New York Yankees pitcher who appeared in eight World Series games
Bill O'Donnell (1943) – Sports announcer for the Baltimore Orioles
Vin Scully (1944) – Sports announcer for the Los Angeles Dodgers, Ford C. Frick Award honoree and Radio Hall of Fame inductee
Colonel Robert Gould Shaw (did not graduate) – attended for a brief time; Commanding officer of the 54th Massachusetts Regiment, the first all African-American regiment during the American Civil War; portrayed by Matthew Broderick in the 1989 movie Glory
George Stirnweiss (1936) – Professional baseball player for the New York Yankees and American League batting champion in 1945
Andrew Velazquez (2012) – Professional baseball player
Donnie Walsh (1958) –  President of basketball operations for the New York Knicks and former general manager for the Indiana Pacers
Malcolm Wilson (1929) – Lieutenant Governor and Governor of New York.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Fordham Preparatory School at GreatSchools.net
Fordham Preparatory School  at PrivateSchoolReview.com