Gholam-Hossein Mohseni-Eje'i (Persian: غلامحسین محسنی اژه‌ای‎, Persian pronunciation: [ɢolɒːmhosejne mohsenije eʒei]; born 1956) is an Iranian conservative politician, jurist and prosecutor who currently serves as the second-highest official in the Judicial system of Iran.
He was the minister of intelligence from 2005 to July 2009, when he was abruptly dismissed. He has also held a number of governmental posts since 1984. Currently he is the first deputy of the Chief Justice of Iran.


== Early life and education ==
Gholam Hossein Mohseni-Ejehei was born in Ezhiyeh, Isfahan, Iran in 1956. He is a graduate of the Haqqani school in Qom and one of his teachers was Mesbah Yazdi. He also received a master's degree in international law from the Haqqani school.


== Career ==
Mohseni-Eje'i served as Head of the Ministry of Intelligence's Select Committee from 1984 to 1985. He was then Representative of the Head of Judiciary to the Ministry of Intelligence (1986–88). From 1989 to 1990, he served as Head of the Prosecutor’s Office for economic affairs. Next, he held the post of Representative of the Head of Judiciary to the Ministry of Intelligence, from 1991 to 1994. His next post was Prosecutor of the Special Clerical Court, which he held from 1995 to 1997. He was appointed Minister of Intelligence on 24 August 2005 after securing 217 votes in his favor at the Majlis. He was in office until 26 July 2009, when he was abruptly dismissed. No reason was given for his dismissal, but it was thought to be connected to his opposition to the appointment of Esfandiar Rahim Mashaei as first vice-president.Shortly after his dismissal, on 24 August 2009, he was appointed Prosecutor general of Iran by the Head of Judiciary, Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, replacing Ghorbanali Dorri-Najafabadi.


== Activities and views ==
On 15 July 2009, Mohseni-Ejehei told reporters that his ministry might publicize confessions made by people held for weeks without access lawyers. He said "The confessions obtained from those arrested could be made public, should the Judiciary decide to air their remarks." Human rights activists raised concerns that "these so-called confessions are obtained under duress."After his dismissal, president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad praised Mohsen-Eje'i as a good human being but said his removal was necessary as the ministry needed huge changes to cope with the situation. He further said if the ministry had done its job properly, there would not have been post-election bloody riots in which some people died, but he stopped short of criticizing Mohseni-Eje'i as responsible for them.According to Stratfor, Mohseni-Eje'i is a conservative hardliner affiliated with hardline cleric Mohammad Yazdi.Mohsen-Eje'i has indicated he would welcome alternative punishments to the death penalty for some drug traffickers, if these alternatives proposed by teachers were more effective punishments than the death penalty. But he stated that, so far, critics of the death penalty in Iran have not offered alternatives that would deal effectively with Iran's drug gangs.


== See also ==
Chain Murders of Iran


== References ==


== External links ==
18 of Iran’s 21 new ministers hail from Revolutionary Guards, secret police with a photograph of Mohseni-Ejehei
Mohseni Ezhei: From Inquisitor to Minister of Information