High on Emotion: Live from Dublin is the first live album by Chris de Burgh, released by A&M Records in 1990. The album was recorded at the RDS, Dublin in December 1988.
The double vinyl and cassette versions of the album featured 17 tracks from the concert. Due to running time limitations of CD's at the time, the tracks 'Lonely Sky' and 'The Ballroom of Romance' had to be omitted from the 15 track CD version. These two tracks were included on the CD single release of the live version of 'Don't Pay the Ferryman' which was released to support the album. The live version of 'The Ballroom of Romance' was also released as a B-side on a Germany-only single of 'Don't Look Back' released in 1989, over a year prior to the release of this album.
A 81 minute concert film was widely released on VHS cassette in 1990, under the title "Chris de Burgh - Live From Dublin". This included the same track list as the vinyl and cassette releases, however with The track 'The Ballroom of Romance' missing. A very limited release of the video also took place on the Laserdisc format, a higher quality format similar to DVD. A copy of this version is available on YouTube, as is footage of the missing 'The Ballroom of Romance' track, taken from an Irish TV program.   


== Track listing ==
All tracks composed by Chris de Burgh

"Last Night" - 7:07
"Sailing Away" - 5:19
"The Revolution" - 4:04
"I'm Not Scared Anymore" - 4:42
"Spanish Train" - 4:57
"Borderline" - 4:51
"The Risen Lord" - 3:35
"The Last Time I Cried" - 6:16
"The Lady in Red" - 4:07
"A Spaceman Came Travelling" - 3:43
"Patricia The Stripper" - 4:21
"Missing You" - 4:26
"Say Goodbye To It All" - 5:55
"Don't Pay The Ferryman" - 4:15
"High On Emotion" - 5:11


== Track listing (compact cassette) ==
Side One

"Last Night"
"Sailing Away"
"The Revolution"
"I'm Not Scared Anymore"
"Spanish Train"
"Borderline"
"The Risen Lord"
"The Last Time I Cried"Side Two

"The Lady in Red"
"Lonely Sky"
"A Spaceman Came Travelling"
"Patricia The Stripper"
"The Ballroom of Romance"
"Missing You"
"Say Goodbye To It All"
"Don't Pay The Ferryman"
"High On Emotion"


== Personnel ==
Chris de Burgh – guitar, piano, lead vocals
Ian Kojima – guitar, keyboards, saxophone, backing vocals
Al Marnie – bass guitar, backing vocals
Danny McBride – lead guitar, backing vocals
Glenn Morrow – keyboards, backing vocals
Jeff Phillips – drums


== Production ==
Producers – Chris de Burgh, Gregg Jackman and Kenny Thomson.
Engineered and Mixed by Gregg Jackman
Assistant Engineers – Pete Craigie and Gary Stewart
Recorded on Advison Mobile at RDS Arena (Dublin, Ireland).
Mix Assistants – Simon Duff and Avril Mackintosh
Mixed at Marcus Recording Studios (London, England).
Mastered by Jack Adams at Tape One (London, England).
Design – Normal Service
Photography – Colm Henry and Dennis O'Reagan
Liner Notes – Chris de Burgh
Management – Dave Margereson and Kenny Thomson at Mismanagement, Inc.


== External links ==
The Official Chris de Burgh Website
chrisdeburgh.net