Hisham al-Hashimi (born January 6, 1973) (Arabic: هشام الهاشمي‎)   was born in Baghdad 1973, is an Iraqi historian and researcher in security and strategic affairs and extremist groups, and a specialist in the file of the Islamic state and its supporters. He is also an advisor to the Iraqi government on counter-terrorism.


== Bio ==
al-Hashemi was born in Baghdad 1973, Iraqi historian and researcher in security and strategic affairs. He has been a follower of the Iraqi Islamic groups since 1997. He has worked in the field of modern and "jurisprudential" manuscripts, although his academic achievement is Bachelor of Economics and Administration - Statistics Department. He holds a scientific degree in the "Hadith of the Prophet", and has an interest in the history of the  al-Hafiz Alzahbi. He was arrested and sentenced to prison by Saddam Hussein's regime. He was released from prison in 2002. After 2003, he went to work in the press, began writing reports and documents with foreign newspapers and channels, and began writing a blog about the map of armed groups in Iraq,.


== His works ==
Alem Daesh (Book)
(History of al-Qaeda in Iraq) Book 
(organization of the Islamic State from within) Book
More than 500 articles and research published in Iraqi and Arab newspapers and magazines about extremist groups.


== Places of work ==
Director of the National Security and Counterterrorism Program at the AKD Center for Strategic Studies and Research
Security Adviser to the Iraqi Journalists Syndicate.
Member of the Scientific Committee of the Baghdad Conference on Combating Terrorism.
Lecturer in combating terrorism in security academies.
Visiting Scholar at the Rivers Center for Strategic Studies
Member of the team of advisors of the Committee for the Implementation and Follow-up of National Reconciliation in the Office of the Prime Minister of Iraq.
Security Adviser to the Iraqi Journalistic Freedoms Observatory


== References ==


== External links ==
An Interview with Hisham al-Hashimi on France 24
An Interview with Hisham al-Hashimi on Al Aan TV
An Interview with Hisham al-Hashimi on Alahad TV
An Interview with Hisham al-Hashimi on Alhurra