The International Federation of Inventors' Associations (IFIA) is a non-profit, nongovernmental organization founded in London, on July 11, 1968, by inventor's associations of Denmark, Finland, Germany, Great Britain, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.


== IFIA history ==
IFIA was established in 1968 in London by the cooperation of the representatives of seven European countries namely Denmark, Finland, Germany, Great Britain, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland. The IFIA is registered as one of the partners of International Geneva United Nation Office in Geneva (UNOG). The IFIA logo registered in Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property. The organization has member organizations in more than 100 countries, and around 175 member organizations in total. The IFIA has a General Assembly, that includes an Executive Committee and elects the IFIA President. In 2018 the IFIA founded the Silicon Valley International Invention Festival.


== IFIA affiliations ==
IFIA has observer status (Special Category – Technology) at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; observer status at the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO); has United Nations Industrial Development Organization's (UNIDO) consultative status; is a member of the Standing Advisory Committee before the European Patent Office (SACEPO); and is included among the Assembly of Professional Society in European Alliance for Innovation (EAI). IFIA received a grant special consultative status from the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) of the United Nations on June 6, 2019.


== IFIA statutes ==
The IFIA is run according to the following mandatory objectives:

“Improvement of the status of inventors and promote cooperation between inventors’ associations.”
“Collection of information about the state of affairs and practical conditions relating to inventors, inventions and innovation, in order to disseminate them world-wide.”
“Regular scrutinizing of national laws and international conventions, in order to reform them in accordance with the continuous changes in the innovation field and with due consideration to the inventors’ rights.”
“Permanent improvement of the conditions for successful knowledge and technology transfer within the particular countries and internationally via the Technology Transfer Center, working under the supervision of IFIA.”
All other activities in order to encourage and promote invention and innovation, to support inventor's project from the idea development to the invention commercialization, to raise the appreciation of inventors and inventions.”


== IFIA activities ==
IFIA is organizes and supports the publication of reference books, guides, surveys, studies, conferences and conventions, competitions and awards for inventions, illustrative exhibits related to inventors and inventions, and consultative services. They also sponsor the IFIA Awards, which since 2015 have including the Best Invention Medal,[6] Ambassador Medal, and the Memorial medal. Prior awards have included the Global Golden Medal.The Memorial Medal has been awarded to Ivo Josipoviæm, President of Croatia Teresa Stanek Rea, USPTO Acting Director Benoît Battistelli, EPO President Miklós Bendzsel, HIPO President Francis Gurry, and Thailand Deputy Prime Minister Prajin Juntong.


== IFIA Previous Presidents (from 1968) ==
The Presidents of IFIA since 1968:
A.W.Richardson, Great Britain, 1968–1971
Harald A.R. Romanus, Sweden, 1971–1974
Freidrich Burmester, Germany, 1974–1977
Leif Nordstrand, Norway, 1977–1982
L.L. Ware, United Kingdom, 1982–1984
Torfin Rosenvinge Johnsen, Norway, 1984–1985
Bo Goran Wallin, Swedish, 1985–1987
Clarence P. Fledmann, Switzerland, 1987–1990
Farag Moussa, Switzerland, 1990–2006 (now lifetime Honorary President)
András Vedres, Hungary, 2006-2010-2014
Alireza Rastegar, 2014-2018-2022


== See also ==
UN NGO
WIPO Observer list
Unctad Observer list
EPO Standing Advisory Committee before the European Patent Office (SACEPO)
EAI Assembly of Professional Societies (EAI)
United Nation Office in Geneva (UNOG)
IFIA inventors and inventions award
IFIA memorial medal
IFIA inventions , inventors , new product and technology events
MANTAD INTERNATIONAL
MANTAD
MANTAD 2


== References ==

IFIA website