Jakarta Marathon, officially Electric Jakarta Marathon, is the marathon held annually in Jakarta, the capital city of Indonesia in Southeast Asia. The marathon is recognised by Association of International Marathons and Distance Races (AIMS) and International Athletic Association Federation (IAAF). Marathon is organised by tourism ministry of Government of Indonesia. In 2015, the race was held on 25 October, and more than 15,000 people from 53 countries participated in the 2015 marathon. The Jakarta Marathon is aimed to project Jakarta as "world class" tourist destination, especially in sport tourism, and is regarded as the "biggest running event of Indonesia".


== Organisation ==
Jakarta Marathon is sponsored by Tourism and Creative Economy Ministry of Indonesia along with Jakarta administration. PLN, the state electric utility company, is the title sponsor (hence "Electric") while Persatuan Atletik Seluruh Indonesia (PASI) and INSPIRO are among the other partners. The marathon is also recognised by Association of International Marathons and Distance Races (AIMS) and International Athletic Association Federation (IAAF).


== Events and participants ==
Around 10,000 people participated in the inaugural 2013 race; participation was increased to around 14,000 in 2014 and around 15,000 in the 2015 edition. There are events such as the full marathon of 42 km, the half marathon of 21 km, and 10 km and 5 km races. There is also a special race of children, called "Maratoonz". Among foreign participants, there were the most Japanese runners in the first marathon of 2013. In the 2014 version, a limited number of participants were invited from Africa because of the 2014 Ebola outbreak, and only 9 professional runners from East Africa participated in the 2014 edition. In 2014, the total amount of prize money was Rp 2.4 billion,  while in 2015 it was Rp 2.6 billion.


== Course ==

The IAAF recognised the route of Jakarta Marathon as "Grade A". The Full and Half Marathon route passes through various popular landmarks of the city, including National Monument or Monas, the Istiqlal Mosque and the Cathedral across, the Old Batavia and the Fatahillah Square. The 2015 edition had alternative routes from the earlier 2 versions because of various construction work. The route of the 2015 version passed through National Monument (Monas), Jalan Imam Bonjol, HR Rasuna Said Street, then turned at Gerbang Pemuda to MH Thamrin Avenue, Jalan Abdul Muis, Jalan Hayam Wuruk, Chinatown, Bank Mandiri Museum, Jalan Gadjah Mada, the Catholic Cathedral, and finished back at the National Monument (Monas).


== Winners ==
This list of winners below only applies to Full Marathon (42 km) only.Key:
  Course record


== References ==