Jason Itzler (born February 23, 1967) is an American entrepreneur, attorney, and the founder of New York Confidential LLC.


== Early life ==
Jason Lubell Itzler was born Jason Lubell Sylk the only son of Ronnie Lubell and Leonard Allen Sylk. Following his parents divorce, Itzler moved to New York with his mother, who he cites as his greatest inspiration. She died from cancer in 1994. Another big influence for Jason growing up was his mother's father, Nathan Lubell, who was a founding partner in the Riviera (hotel and casino) in Las Vegas. He also owned an amusement park in Coney Island for his 4 young daughters to enjoy. Jason's mother eventually remarried Ron Itzler, a then prominent lawyer in the firm of Fischbein, Badillo, Wagner, and Itzler, and so the family moved to the suburbs of New Jersey. Growing up, Jason attended a number of private schools, including the Elisabeth Morrow School, the Dwight-Englewood School, the Hotchkiss School, and Tenafly High School. Jason spent many of his evenings at the New York Friars Club, and summers in the Catskills, where he worked as a cabana boy at the Concord Hotel. Jason graduated from The George Washington University with degrees in Political Science and Art History. He was also a member of the fraternity, Zeta Beta Tau. In 1993 Jason Itzler graduated from Nova Law School in Fort Lauderdale, Florida with a (J.D.) Juris Doctor degree.


== Business ventures ==
In the late 1980s, Itzler, entered Nova Southeastern University, a law school in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. While there he started a phone sex operation called M2 Communications, Inc., where he would charge $4.98-a-minute, and soon become a young millionaire. The company averaged $1,500,000 a month. Due to his mother's untimely death he abandoned his business and was eventually forced to declare bankruptcy in 1997. His next company was called SoHo Models. Jason rented an 8,000-square-foot loft on the corner of Canal and Broadway in New York City to be one of the first companies to supply Webcam porn.


=== New York Confidential ===
Jason Itzler started New York Confidential, an online escort service that invented the $2,000/hr Girlfriend Experience (GFE) in 2003, while he lived on Washington Street in Hoboken, New Jersey. New York Confidential was run out of Itzler's Art Deco apartment in Hoboken. The company was doing well and the office was moved to a 5000 sq ft. loft at 79 Worth Street in Manhattan. In 2004 Itzler was averaging a gross of $55,000 a night. "That's because we were the best," said Itzler. "At NY Confidential, I told my girls that the pressure is on them because we have to provide the clients with the greatest single experience ever, a Kodak moment to treasure for the rest of their lives. Spreading happiness, positive energy, and love,that's what being the best means to me. Call me a dreamer, but that's the NY Confidential credo."  It was this attention to detail and customer satisfaction that made the group successful, attracting a wide array of clients, including senators and famous athletes. There were even talks of franchising Confidentials in other cities, such as Las Vegas.


== Personal life ==
Itzler is Jewish and has been engaged 7 times. He has dated his own girls including the number one escort Natalie McLennan, known as Natalia. Natalia made as much as $2,000 per hour with a two-hour minimum working as an escort at New York Confidential. Asked if the work affected her relationship with Itzler, Natalia says he would sometimes get jealous of the time she spent away from him, but not of the men. It would only bother him if she slept with another man for free. In 2010, Natalia pleaded guilty to a charge of attempted money laundering in connection to New York Confidential. Itzler has Hanuman and "Super Lucky" tattooed on his arms since the early 1990s.


== Media Attention ==
Itzler has been featured on The View (U.S. TV series),  He appeared several times on The Opie & Anthony show, including phoning in from prison. He also appeared as guest star twice on The Howard Stern Show.


== References ==