John Acorn is a Canadian naturalist. He is a lecturer at the University of Alberta, a research associate at the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Paleontology, and a research associate at the E.H. Strickland Entomology Museum. He is also a local Edmonton celebrity, combining folk music with educational lyrics about the natural world.


== Television Series ==
John Acorn became publicly known for his television series Acorn, the Nature Nut.  88 episodes were produced, each focusing on a different aspect of the natural world, and which featured folk songs, whimsical descriptions like Flying Neon Toothpicks in the Grass, and characters like Skibibad Windfield.  He was also the host of Twits and Pishers a series about birdwatching that ran for two seasons on the Discovery Channel.
Acorn also appears in recorded displays at the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Paleontology.


== Publications ==
Birds of Alberta (Authored with Chris C. Fisher and Gary Ross)
Birds of Coastal British Columbia (Authored with Nancy Baron and Ted Nordhagen)
Birds of the Pacific Northwest Coast (Authored with Nancy Baron)
Bugs of Alberta (Authored with Ian Sheldon)
Bugs of British Columbia (Authored with Ian Sheldon)
Bugs of Northern California (Authored with Ian Sheldon)
Bugs of Ontario (Authored with Ian Sheldon)
Bugs of Washington and Oregon (Authored with Ian Sheldon)
Butterflies of Alberta
Butterflies of British Columbia (Authored with Ian Sheldon)
Compact Guide to Alberta Birds  (Authored with Chris Fisher and Andy Bezener)
Damselflies of Alberta: Flying Neon Toothpicks in the Grass
Deep Alberta: Fossil Facts and Dinosaur Digs
Ladybugs of Alberta: Finding the Spots and Connecting the Dots
Tiger Beetles of Alberta: Killers on the Clay, Stalkers on the Sand


== Awards ==
2013 Medal of Honor, Entomological Foundation
2012 Royal Society of Canada McNeil Medal
2008 NSERC Michael Smith Award for Science Promotion
2005 Distinguished Alumni Award. University of Alberta
2000 Emerald Award of Interpretation Canada for Gallery Videos at the Royal Tyrell Museum
1998 ALBERTA SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ASTech excellence in science & technology journalism
1998 GEMINI AWARD nomination
1996 GEMINI AWARD nomination
1997 AMPIA AWARD, Alberta Motion Picture industry awards.
1997 Edmonton Nature Centre Foundation
1997 Calgary Zoo, Pachyderm Award
1995 AMPIA AWARD, Alberta Motion Picture Industries Awards


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website