King James's School is a coeducational secondary school located in Almondbury in the English county of West Yorkshire.


== History ==

King James's Grammar School was founded as chantry school in 1547 and received its name and a royal charter in 1608 thanks to the efforts of three men who travelled on horseback to London to get a royal charter from the king. They rode from Farnley Tyas, the nearby village, having been sent to London to get the charter by the local wealthy men from Almondbury who wanted a local school for their offspring to visit. Extensions were made to the school by William Swinden Barber between 1880 and 1883.The grammar school era ended in 1976 when it became a comprehensive school: King James's School. The school was designated a specialist Science College in 2004. In September 2012 the school converted to academy status. The current principal is Mr Ian Rimmer.


== The school today ==
King James's School is a comprehensive secondary school with a catchment area that includes Almondbury, Dalton, Grange Moor, Kirkheaton and Lepton. The school offers GCSEs, BTECs and Cambridge Nationals as programmes of study for pupils. It has been labelled Britain’s strictest school after a new rule book containing 40 new rules. Ones including not looking out of the window and asking why when they have been told off.


== Publications ==
The school is the subject of two histories: A History of King James's Grammar School in Almondbury (author: Gerald Hinchliffe) and King James's School in Almondbury: An Illustrated History (editors: Roger Dowling and John Hargreaves).
A book Morning Assembly (editor: Roger Dowling; text: Andrew Taylor) gives a detailed account of the life of former headmaster Harry Taylor together with a compilation in facsimile form of some 100 prayers collected by Harry Taylor for use each day at morning assembly.


== Notable former pupils ==


=== King James's Grammar School ===

Felix Aylmer, actor
Jon Barton, Editor from 1996-98 of Today (Radio 4), and Editor from 1994-96 of the One O'Clock and Six O'Clock TV news
Sir John George Beharrell, former managing director of the Dunlop Rubber Company and a director of Imperial Airways
David Brown, Managing Director David Brown & Sons and owner of Aston Martin Ltd.
Peter Carter QC, Chair of the Bar Human Rights Committee from 2003–05
Rev Prof Benjamin Franklin Cocker, University of Michigan in Ann Arbor
Prof Paul Crowther, Professor of Astrophysics, University of Sheffield
Prof Alex Danchev, military, politics and art historian and biographer
Maj-Gen Henry Evans CB, Director of Army Education from 1969–72
Prof Ian Graham Gass, Professor of Earth Sciences at the Open University from 1969–82
Philip Goldsmith, President of the Royal Meteorological Society from 1982–85
Michael Hardcastle prolific author of Children's literature
Sir Harold Percival Himsworth, former Honorary Physician to the Queen
Derek Ibbotson, athlete
Michael Jackson, writer and beer connoisseur
Gorden Kaye, actor (star of the BBC Television programme 'Allo 'Allo!)
Prof Henry Laycock, Professor of Philosophy at Queen's University, Canada
Herbert Morley CBE, Director General and Manager of Steel, Peech and Tozer from 1965–68
David Morphet, author
Prof Alan Prout, sociologist, University of Leeds
Ryan Sidebottom, England cricketer
Robert Stephenson, Metropolitan Police detective
Prof Keith Vickerman, Regius Professor of Zoology from 1984-98 at the University of Glasgow
Prof James Pounder Whitney, Dixie Professor of Ecclesiastical History at the University of Cambridge from 1919–39
Dr Judy Hirst, , Deputy Director of the MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit at the University of Cambridge


== References ==


== Further reading ==
A History of King James's Grammar School in Almondbury (1963), Gerald Hinchliffe, The Old Almondburians' Society, 384pp, ASIN B0000CLZS5
An Illustrated History of King James's School in Almondbury (2007), Gerald Hinchliffe, Edward Royle, Richard Taylor, et al., The Old Almondburians' Society, 112pp, full colour


== External links ==
King James's School official website
The Old Almondburians' Society