Leviathan is a fictional criminal organization in DC Comics, later revealed to be a schism of the League of Assassins under the leadership of Talia al Ghul, the daughter of Ra's al Ghul.
The organization appears in a different form in the fourth season finale and fifth season of Supergirl.


== Publication history ==
Leviathan was introduced in Batman: The Return (Jan. 2011) and was created by Grant Morrison and David Finch.


== Fictional team history ==


=== First incarnation ===
Leviathan is an organization founded by Talia al Ghul; upon leaving her father, Ra's al Ghul's League of Assassins. Leviathan's liturgy is staunchly anti-capitalist and, seeks to dismantle society and impose itself as the leaders of a new way.
Leviathan first became known to the heroes of Earth as a terror group who kidnapped the child of a Yemeni sheikh. However, Batman discovered that Leviathan was working with the sheikh and was planning to attack the world with mind-controlled children and engineered metahumans.Batman immediately connected the organization to an apocalyptic vision he'd received while coming back from the dead, and positioned his Batman Incorporated organization to oppose them. After some moves, Leviathan seemed to form up behind Doctor Dedalus, a Nazi masterspy imprisoned on the Falkland Islands, with a predicted lifespan of months due to Alzheimers'. In the aftermath of Dedalus' breakout, further investigation showed that a paper-trail showed a flow of child soldiers from training camps in the central African republic of Mtamba to locations around the world, for use by Leviathan in their campaign.
In Batman Inc's struggle against Doctor Dedalus' master plan, they struck, and hit empty locations, which were in fact pre-prepared traps by Leviathan. Recovering, they realized that Dedalus was a feint, designed to make them show their hand on the eve of the war. Via a telephone, the leader of Leviathan, Talia al Ghul, spoke from their new headquarters opposite the cinema on Crime Alley. Talia stated Leviathan's goal was war with Batman's followers and the destruction of civilization.
Talia took control of the League of Assassins and added its agents to the plan. The plan began by seeding mind-control chemicals in the Gotham food supply through the "Dark Tower" fast food chain, while taking control of the Brothers Grimm Syndicate, which controlled the club on Gotham's West Side. Using a combination of agents in the school system, the police, and the civil service, Leviathan worked to control Gotham's children.
Talia soon tells Batman that her creation of Leviathan has been all out of spite. As revenge for denying her his love and unwavering dedication to his crusade for justice, Talia created Leviathan as an expressed antithesis of Batman Incorporated. The Heretic is eventually shown to be the eponymous "Leviathan" of the organization; the "Third Batman" that is prophesied to send Gotham into chaos and destroy it. However, the Heretic continuously fails Talia and proves himself to be just as defiant as his genetic template, the then-deceased Damian Wayne. After killing the Heretic, Talia attempts to activate a "death ring" around the planet, established by worldwide Leviathan agents. Batman Inc. disables the weapon, and Talia is killed by Kathy Kane. Their leader dead, the intelligence agency known as Spyral (another organization Doctor Dedalus was involved with) took over Leviathan's resources and the organization presumably collapsed in the wake of their defeat.
Upon returning from the dead, Talia ordered her most trusted assassin to kill one of Leviathan's underbosses, who had the intention to reveal the existence of the organization to the U.S. authorities. Trust inside the criminal network was shattered and when Talia died and then was resurrected, she was ousted from her position as leader of Leviathan. The organization then fractured into various factions, guided by competing leaders.Talia is taken to a Lazarus Pit in Khadym by those loyal to her and is resurrected from the dead.


=== Second incarnation ===
Another incarnation of Leviathan appeared in the pages of "Event Leviathan." Leviathan has even taken over Project Cadmus as Batgirl discovered.


== Membership ==
Leviathan - New Head of Leviathan.
Talia al Ghul - Former Head of Leviathan.
Professor Pyg - Lazlo Valentin at first appears to be working for Simon Hurt, but it is later revealed that he is actually working for Talia al Ghul. He is incarcerated in Arkham Asylum after being captured by Batman (Dick Grayson) and Robin (Damian Wayne) in the first volume of Batman and Robin.
The Heretic (Fatherless) - Mysterious agent of Leviathan in a bat-like costume. The Heretic is a clone of Damian Wayne, first seen as a fetus in the first volume of Batman and Robin, whose growth has been accelerated to adulthood by way of a bio-engineered whale carcass. After killing Damian Wayne, the Heretic is defeated (but not killed) by Batman when he is run through with a sword.  He is then finished off when Talia al Ghul kills him and blows up his body along with Wayne Tower.
Son of Pyg - Son of Professor Pyg. Real name Janosz Valentin a.k.a. Johnny Valentine. Later defeated by Batgirl (Stephanie Brown) during a plot to turn a group of teen mercenaries-in-training into agents of Leviathan.
Dr. Dedalus (Otto Netz) - Former Nazi scientist, and agent of Leviathan and the biological father of Kathy Kane, the original Batwoman. Later killed by the new Robin using a concealed knife.
Goatboy - Gotham City-bred taxi driver-turned-assassin in light of Talia's billion dollar bounty on Damian. Later killed by Lumina Lux.
Silencer - Honor Guest was an assassin in Leviathan but quit.
Quietus - A Leviathan underboss.
Wishbone - Ran the magical division of Leviathan.
Gunn - A Leviathan underboss. He's killed while fighting Quietus and Silencer in Khadym.
Jonah 9 - A Leviathan underboss.
Raze
Rutger Orestes - A Leviathan underboss that was murdered.


== In other media ==
Leviathan appears in Supergirl. It's known members are Rama Khan, Gamemnae, an elderly woman named Margo (portrayed by Patti Allan), and an unnamed elderly man (portrayed by Duncan Fraser). As revealed in the season four finale episode, titled "Quest for Peace", they are responsible for employing Eve Teschmacher and manipulating Lex Luthor. After Lex Luthor's defeat, a disguised Eve is at the bus stop when Margo approaches her. She informs Eve that there are many operatives of Leviathan and that Eve's work with them is not done because Leviathan would always find her. Margo ends the discussion by quoting "Leviathan is everywhere and Leviathan is coming". In the episode "In Plain Sight", Leviathan sends Breathtaker to assassinate Elena Torres. This plan was thwarted by Supergirl and Breathtaker is remanded to D.E.O. custody. William Dey was investigating an organization with which he suspects  Andrea Rojas is connected. In the episode "Dangerous Liaisons", Breathtaker was interrogated about who she works for. Leviathan later dispatches their operative "Rip Roar" to cause a geyser eruption in the north large enough to flood all the coastal cities. This plot is once again thwarted by Supergirl with the help of Martian Manhunter. It was mentioned that Rip Roar's armor prevents Martian Manhunter from scanning his mind while William Dey is shocked to learn that Rip Roar is actually his old friend Russel Rogers who was presumed dead. Andrea's connection with Leviathan is revealed when Margo appears in her limousine and informs her of  Rip Roar's fate. In the episode "Confidence Women", a flashback reveals that the male representative persuaded Andrea to take the Acrata medallion and she was subsequently used by Margo in order to kill Governor Harper. In the present, Acrata manages to free Rip Roar with the help of two Aurafacian-possessed operatives. When Rip Roar is sniped at the airport after serving his purpose, the male representative states that Leviathan still has some use for her. He also informs Andrea that her Acrata abilities came from the darkness within her instead of from the medallion that is now in Lena Luthor's possession. The episode "Tremors" revealed that Rama Khan and Gememnae came from Krypton's sister planet Jarhanpur during the Age of Dinosaurs. When Margo fails to reclaim the medallion, Rama Khan takes matters into his own hands. His plan involved harnessing Acrata's lifeforce to cause a supervolcano to form. After that plot failed, Gamemnae takes over Rama Khan's position. Following the Crisis on Infinite Earths crossover, Gamemnae carries out her plan by posing as a member of Obsidian Tech's board of directors named Gemma Cooper.
The Heretic appears as a supporting antagonist in Batman: Bad Blood, voiced by Travis Willingham.


== References ==