Nadine Koutcher (Belarusian: Надзея Кучар, born 18 May 1983) is a Belarusian opera singer. A dramatic coloratura soprano, she was the winner of the 2015 BBC Cardiff Singer of the World competition.


== Life ==
Koutcher was born in Minsk in 1983. In 2003 she graduated from Minsk State Musical College, the Department of Musical Theory.In 2006 she won the 1st prize in the vocal contest of the Religious Music Festival «Mahutny Bozha». In 2007 she won 1st prize in two International competitions: Bibigul Tulegenova's Contest in Khazahstan and Irina Bogacheva's Contest in St. Petersburg. Also in 2007 she had opera debut in the Opera and Ballet Theatre of St. Petersburg Conservatory, she sang Marfa in the opera The Tsar’s Bride by Rimsky-Korsakov. In 2009 she started performing in The Mikhailovsky Theatre in St. Petersburg, her debut role was Violetta in Verdi's La Traviata. In the same theatre she performed other roles for lyrical and coloratura soprano, such as Princess Eudoxie in Galevi's “La Juive”, Oscar in Verdi's “Un Ballo in Maschera”.
During her studies at the Conservatory under the patronage of Sergey Stadler she took part in many projects, singing the roles of Lucia (“Lucia di Lammermoor” by Gaetano Donizetti), Maria (“Ivan the 4th” by George Bizet), Serafim (“Christ on the Mount of Olives” by Beethoven), soprano solo in Symphony No.9 by Beethoven and the soprano in Mozart's Requiem.
In October 2010 in Beijing's Concert Hall she gave her first solo concert, accompanied by the pianist, and the prize-winner Dmitry Pavliy.
In 2011 she graduated from the St. Petersburg Conservatory with a Vocalist Diploma (the class of a Distinguished Artist, professor Tamara Novichenko, and the chamber class of Kira Izotova).
In August 2011 she won the 1st prize in Mikhailov's Young Opera Singers’ Contest (Cheboksary, Russia).
In 2012 she was invited by Teodor Currentzis to the ensemble of soloists of The Perm State P.I.Tchaikovsky Opera and Ballet Theatre. In May 2012 she took part in the International Diaghilev Festival and was given the role of Medea in the Russian premiere of Pascal Dusapin's opera "Medea Material". For this role, she was awarded the Golden Mask in Moscow in April 2013.
In June 2012 she recorded a CD with the MusicAeterna Orchestra conducting by Currentzis, they performed Rameau's works for Sony Music.
In September 2012 she won the Grand Prix of the International Vocal Competition 's-Hertogenbosch, she also won the Audience Award and the Prize for the Best Performance of the Obligatory Piece.
In April 2013, on the stage of the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam, she sang soprano in the 9th Symphony of Beethoven (conductor Conrad van Alphen), in May of the same year during Norwich Norfolk Festival – soprano in Verdi's Requiem with the London Symphony Orchestra and David Perry.
In September 2013, Nadine took part in staging the world premiere of Henry Purcell's opera "The Indian Queen" in the new edition of one of the most popular directors - Peter Sellars - joint co-production of the Perm Opera and Madrid's Teatro Real, conducted by Teodor Currentzis. Debuted at the Teatro Real in November 2013 in the role of Dona Isabel. For this role Nadine also received the Golden Mask in Moscow in 2015.
In May–June 2014 Nadine has debuted in Bellini's “I Puritani” ( Elvira) at the Teatro Municipal de Santiago de Chile ( with the conductor José Miguel Pérez-Sierra and the director Emilio Sagi).
In June 2015 Nadine Koutcher became a main prize winner in the most prestigious competition Cardiff Singer of the World.In September 2015 she made her debut in role of Mathilde in Rossini's “William Tell” in Grand Théâtre de Genève conducted by Jesus-Lopez Cobos and directed by David Pountney. Then she will make a debut in Polish National opera in the same role in January 2017 under maestro Andriy Yurkevich.
In December 2015 Nadine took part in new production of “La Traviata” in the title role at Berliner Staatsoper with maestro Daniel Barenboim and director Dieter Dorn.
Her future engagements include Amenaide in “Tancredi” by Rossini and Violetta in “La Traviata” both in Teatro Municipal de Santiago in June–July 2016.
In November 2016 Nadine made her debut in Opera de Paris in role of Olympia in Robert Carsen's production of Les Contes d’Hoffmann by Offenbach with maestro Philippe Jordan.


== References ==