The NWA World Television Championship is a world television championship owned and promoted by the American professional wrestling promotion National Wrestling Alliance (NWA). The current champion is Zicky Dice, who is in his first reign.
On December 14, 2019, the NWA announced they were reintroducing the NWA World Television Championship with a tournament to determine a new champion. Although past Television champions from both the Georgia and Mid-Atlantic versions have been referred to on NWA programming, the original titles and respective lineage are currently owned by WWE. As it is a professional wrestling championship, the NWA World Television Championship is not won not by actual competition, but by a scripted ending to a match, determined by the bookers and match makers. On occasion the promotion declares a championship vacant, which means there is no champion at that point in time. This can either be due to a storyline, or real life issues such as a champion suffering an injury being unable to defend the championship, or leaving the company.


== Title history ==
On December 14, 2019, during NWA's Into the Fire pay-per-view, it was announced they were reintroducing the NWA World Television Championship with a tournament to determine a new champion at their next PPV, Hard Times, on January 24, 2020. On the December 17 episode of NWA's weekly flagship program, NWA Power, it was revealed that all NWA World Television Championship tournament matches would have a 6 minute, 5 second time limit. The time limit was an homage to the 6:05 PM start time of NWA Power as well as a tribute to the original start time for NWA's World Championship Wrestling that ran from the 1970s to 1992. All tournament competitors, as well as two qualifying matches, were then announced. On the January 7 episode of NWA Power, Tim Storm clarified that six competitors would move on to the first round of the NWA World Television Championship tournament. He also announced there would be two additional spots open in the first round for competitors yet to be named and not currently on the NWA roster. The tournament bracket was unveiled on the January 14 episode of NWA Power. On the January 21 episode of NWA Power, the final two competitors in the first round of the tournament were named: Matt Cross from the independent circuit and Dan Maff from Ring of Honor.On the January 28, 2020 episode of NWA Power, the "Lucky Seven Rule" was announced. A champion who successfully defends the championship 7 consecutive times will receive a match for the NWA Worlds Heavyweight Championship.


=== Hard Times tournament ===
1 ^ Replaced Nick Aldis when Aldis refused to enter and ordered fellow Strictly Business member Isaacs to take his place.2 ^ Replaced an injured Zane Dawson when Anderson won an 8-man Last Chance Gauntlet match to fill the spot.3 ^ Anderson was not "medically cleared" to compete giving Tim Storm a bye as a result.


== Belt design ==
The current design is the same that Jim Crockett Promotions used from April 1985 to November 1988. It is also the same design World Championship Wrestling used from November 1988 to January 1991 and for the WCW World Television Championship belt from January 1991 to May 1992. The design uses a dual-colored leather strap (black front, red back) as the base. The main plate is nickel silver with a red background for the words “NWA Television Heavyweight Wrestling Champion.” An eagle’s head and wings sit underneath the “NWA” letters, a globe is etched in the silver underneath “Television,” and a wrestling ring with two figures is etched in the silver underneath “Heavyweight Wrestling Champion.” There are four side plates. On the left are the logos of two of the major television networks: NBC and ABC. On the right, the logo of the television network CBS is on one plate while an image of a satellite dish is on the other.


== Reigns ==
As of March 6, 2020.


== See also ==
List of current champions in the National Wrestling Alliance
List of National Wrestling Alliance championships
NWA National Television Championship
WCW World Television Championship
List of WCW World Television Champions


== Footnotes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official NWA website
Official NWA YouTube channel
Official NWA Facebook page