Philip Proctor (born July 28, 1940) is an American actor, voice actor and a member of the Firesign Theatre. He has performed voice-over work for video games, films and television series.


== Career ==
Of the four members of Firesign Theatre, Proctor has had the greatest amount of mainstream exposure as an actor. A talented  boy soprano, he worked extensively in musical theatre in his youth, including numerous juvenile female roles in productions of Gilbert & Sullivan operettas, and in his early adult career he worked in musical theatre on  Broadway, the West Coast and in touring productions. During this period Proctor worked with many famous names including composer Richard Rodgers, and forged important social connections, becoming close friends with notable figures including Henry Jaglom, Brandon de Wilde, Peter Fonda and Karen Black.
Proctor also appeared occasionally on television in small roles, including episodes of Daniel Boone, All in the Family, and Night Court; and Off Broadway in the 1964 musical The Amorous Flea. He also provided the voices of Meltdown in Treasure Planet and "Drunk Monkey" in the Dr. Dolittle remake series. He has also provided uncredited ADR overdubs for numerous movies over the years. More recently, he has done voices for several cartoons and video games, including the voice of Howard Deville in Rugrats and All Grown Up! on Nickelodeon, "background" voices for Disney features, and voice work on Power Rangers Time Force. He also did two voices in the GameCube video game Eternal Darkness: Sanity's Requiem. He is the voice of The Professor and White Monkey in the Ape Escape series. Recently, his voice was featured in the video game Dead Rising as Russell Barnaby, in the Assassin's Creed series as Dr. Warren Vidic, and on Adventures in Odyssey as Leonard Meltsner and Detective Don Polehaus. In the 2007 live audio production of the Angie Award-winning screenplay Albatross (original screenplay written by Lance Rucker and Timothy Perrin)  at the International Mystery Writers Festival, he played seven characters requiring four different accents: KGB agent Stefan Linnik, East German Communist Party apparatchik Kurt Mueller; a West Berlin gasthaus owner; an armed forces radio announcer; the Senate minority whip; a Secret Service guard; and Gerhard Derstman, the East German Cultural Attache/Stasi member. He also lent his voice to the game Battlezone. He was the announcer on Big Brother in seasons 3 through 6. Proctor also lent his voice in the Marvel: Ultimate Alliance series as the voices of Edwin Jarvis and Baron Mordo in the first game, and the Tinkerer in the sequel, Marvel: Ultimate Alliance 2.  He currently serves among the repertory cast of featured voices in recent and current Disney animated films.
Stage versions of the records Don't Crush That Dwarf, Hand Me The Pliers; The Further Adventures of Nick Danger, Third Eye; and Waiting For The Electrician, or Someone Like Him & Temporarily Humboldt County are published Broadway Play Publishing Inc.
In 2017 Proctor published an autobiography entitled Where's My Fortune Cookie? coauthored with Brad Schreiber.


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===


==== Animation ====
All Grown Up! – Howard Deville, Mr. Jacobi, Priest, Italian Shopper, Football Coach, Plastic Soccer Player
Richie Rich – Additional Voices
Pound Puppies – Rusty the Plott Hound (2 episodes)
Rugrats – Howard Deville, Announcer, Bob, Circus Ringmaster, Clown, Dance Announcer, Policeman, Man, Band Leader, Oarsman, Commander, Germ, French Voice, Car Alarm, Workman, Paul, Paul Gatsby, Mover, Bernie, Allen Murphy, Driver #1, Tour Guide, DJ, Brinks Guard, Richter, Mr. Loew, Earl, Golfer #2, Intern, Dr. Lecter, Thorg, Mr. Steele
Spider-Man The Animated Series – Electro/Rhienholdt Kragov
Taz-Mania – Chief Bushrat
The Tick – Courderoy Cordova, Fortissimo Brothers, Charles' Father
The Smurfs – King Gerard
Where on Earth Is Carmen Sandiego? – Additional Voices
Famous 5: On the Case – Ralph Campbell
Grim & Evil – Dr. Cornea, Ogre (1 episode)
Justice League – First Humanoid (1 episode)
Avatar: The Last Airbender – Music Teacher (1 episode)
The Wild Thornberrys – Game Host, Body Builder (1 episode)


==== Live action ====
Power Rangers Time Force – Miracon (voice)
Big Brother – Announcer (seasons 3–5)


=== Feature films ===
Both animated and live action:

A Bug's Life – Slick
A Safe Place – Fred
Aladdin – Guards
Amazon Women on the Moon – Mike at the Party
Antz - Termites
Asterix and the Vikings – Additional Voices
Atlantis: The Lost Empire – Atlanteans, Explorers
Barnyard – Root's Disco Cows
Beauty and the Beast – Additional Voices
Brother Bear – Inuit Tribe Members
Chicken Run – Chickens
Dr. Dolittle – Drunk Monkey (voice)
Finding Nemo – Bob the Seahorse
Happily N'Ever After – Amigo 1
Hercules – Boat Captain, Snowball the Cat
Home on the Range – Man on Train
I Build the Tower (2006 documentary) – Voices of Judge and Attorney
Inside Out – Additional Voices
Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius – Additional Voices
Khumba – Zebra Group, Additional Voices
Lobster Man From Mars – Lou
Monsters, Inc. – Charlie Proctor, Additional Voices
Mulan – China Citizens, Hun Army
Outback – Lug
Porco Rosso – Additional Voices
Racing Stripes – Trenton's Henchhorse #1
Recess: School's Out – Golfer #2, Scientist #2
Roadside Romeo – Additional Voices
Rugrats Go Wild – Howard Deville
Rugrats in Paris: The Movie – Howard Deville
Spirited Away – Frog-like Chef
Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron – Colonel's Soldiers
Tarzan – Max, English Captain, Elephant #1
The Hunchback of Notre Dame – Frollo's Soldiers, Guards, Paris Citizens
The Iron Giant – Jack the Soldier
The Lion King – Additional Voices
The Lord of the Rings – Male Bree #1
The Princess and the Frog – Additional Voices
The Rescuers Down Under – French Mouse
The Rugrats Movie – Howard Deville, Igor
Theodore Rex - Additional Voices
Toy Story – Bowling Announcer, Pizza Planet Guards
Toy Story 2 – Airline Rep, Japanese Collector, Sign-Off
Treasure Planet – Blinko, Meltdown
The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle – The Countdown Man


=== Video games ===
007: From Russia with Love – Q, Bartender, Party Guests
Ape Escape Academy – Monkey White (US version)
Ape Escape 3 – Monkey White, Professor (US version)
Ape Escape: On the Loose – Professor, Clown
Area 51 – Mr. White
Armed & Dangerous – Captain 3, Monk 1, Old Man Peasant
Assassin's Creed – Warren Vidic
Assassin's Creed II – Warren Vidic, Florentine Guardsman, San Gimignano Guardsman, Venetian Guardsman, Templar Lair Guardsman, Romagna Guardsman, Tailors, Florentine Citizen, San Gimignano Citizen
Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood – Warren Vidic
Assassin's Creed: Revelations – Warren Vidic
Assassin's Creed: Rogue – Warren Vidic, Gang Members
Assassin's Creed III – Warren Vidic
Batman: Arkham Knight – Simon Stagg
Battlezone – General George Collins, Russian tank pilot, others
Blood Omen II: Legacy of Kain – Faustus, Additional Voices
Blue Dragon – Fushira
Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare – Additional Voices
Call of Duty 2 – Additional Voices
Call of Duty 2: Big Red One – Additional Voices
Champions of Norrath: Realms of EverQuest – Additional Voices
Command & Conquer: Yuri's Revenge – Additional Voices
Company of Heroes – Additional Voices
Crackdown 2 – Additional Voices
Dark Chronicle – Flotsam
Darksiders II – The Lord of Bones
Dead Rising – Russell Barnaby
Doom 3 – Additional Voices
Dungeons & Dragons: Dragonshard – Additional Voices
Eternal Darkness: Sanity's Requiem – Roberto Bianchi, Bishop
Final Fantasy X-2 – Bayra, Donga
Final Fantasy XII – Additional Voices
Final Fantasy XIII – Cocoon Inhabitants
Gothic 3 – Additional Voices
Gun – Patrick Denton
La Pucelle: Tactics – Father Salade
Lair – Guardian #3
Legacy of Kain: Defiance – Additional Male Voices
Lighthouse: The Dark Being – Dr. Jeremiah Krick
Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII – Additional Voices
Lionheart – Additional Voices
Marvel: Ultimate Alliance – Edwin Jarvis, Baron Mordo
Marvel: Ultimate Alliance 2 – Tinkerer
Metal Gear Ac!d2 – Chaigidiel
Night Watch – Additional Voices
Prototype – Additional Voices
Secret Weapons Over Normandy – Soviet Voices #2
SOCOM II: U.S. Navy Seals – Arjan Manjani
SOCOM: U.S. Navy SEALs Combined Assault – Additional Voice Over Talent
SOCOM: U.S. Navy SEALs Fireteam Bravo 2 – Additional Voice Over Talent
Soldier of Fortune II: Double Helix – Additional Voices
Star Trek: Klingon Academy – Civil War Helm Officer, Tako, Commander Roq
Star Wars: Force Commander – Attack Tank Driver, Rebel Trooper #2, Stormtrooper Sergeant
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds – Empire Cruiser Captain, Jedi Master, Viceroy Nute Gunray
Star Wars: The Old Republic – Devar Gann, Doctor Vernan, Gon-Sa, Master Nimi, Master Orbis Keln, Maverse Pontilo, Officer Vempor, Orin-Va, Tarkos Sund, Vanel, Zoo Official
Supreme Commander – Additional Voices
Syphon Filter: Dark Mirror – Viktor Yavlinsky
Syphon Filter: The Omega Strain – Proust, ALA B, Pulikovsky, CDP Soldier B, Samaev
The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth – Orcs
The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II – Orcs
The Lord of the Rings: War in the North – Radagast the Brown
The Saboteur – Kessler
Titan Quest: Immortal Throne – Additional Voices
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Lockdown – Additional Voices
Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Double Agent – Additional Voices
Toy Story: Buzz Lightyear's Blast Up Together – Hamm
World in Conflict – Additional Voices


== References ==


== External links ==
Planet Proctor
Philip Proctor on IMDb
KCRW "Bob Claster's Funny Stuff" interview about early days of Firesign Theater, and a separate show in which Proctor discusses Bob & Ray