Qplaze is a brand of software for mobile devices such as cell phones, marketed by the «Vivat Computer Service» (VCS) company. Based in Ukraine, it serves primarily the Commonwealth of Independent States market. 
VCS was founded in 2000 to develop business and game applications for mobile devices, marketed under the Qplaze trademark. In 2004, it merged with Russian Mobile Entertainment to create a holding company, Qplaze-RME, with VCS as the development unit and Russian Mobile Entertainment as the distribution arm. In the fall of 2006 the Qplaze-RME ceased to exist. From 2006 to 2010 it became an independent company. Since 2010 it owns VSC (trademark «Qplaze») and the British company NOMOC Publishing LTD. 
During its existence the studio has created more than 90 games for cell phones and also developed the largest online-project – multiuser game for mobile phones «Age of Heroes Online».  In the field of server solutions Qplaze® is successfully cooperating with such mobile operators as «Megafon», «Kyivstar» and «Life :)» and mobile social networks developed on the basis of Qplaze® GSMFuns 2.0 technology unite more than a million of people.   At the moment «Qplaze» is one of the leading game developers for mobile phones and mobile server solutions within CIS. Recipe for company’s successful development is a high quality of developed technologies and loyal attitude towards its partners. Games under «Qplaze» trademark are released in CIS, Europe and Asia in more than 10 languages and mobile social solutions are used by 4 leading mobile operators in CIS. 


== Games developed by Qplaze ==
This is a partial list of games developed by Qplaze.

Age of Heroes
Age of Heroes II: Underground Horror
Age of Heroes III: Orcs Retribution
Age of Heroes IV: Blood and Darkness
Age of Heroes V: Hero Path
Age of Heroes V: Chimera's Heart
Age of Heroes V: Heretic
Age of Heroes VI: Shadow of Immortal
Age of Heroes: Online
Badman Bros.
D.O.D Defend or Die
Edge of Fire
Edge of Fire: War in the jungle
Edge of Fire II
Golden Revolver
Golden Revolver II
Heroes of War: Sandstorm
Heroes of War: Nanowarrior
Magic Zum
Idol Lines
Office Golf
Panty Theft
Rapid Fire
Real Special Force
RUSH
RUSH EX
RUSH: Street Boss
RUSH 2
S.T.A.L.K.E.R. Mobile
Stirlitz
Stirlitz 2
W.A.R Weapon. Arena. Race
W.A.R Weapon. Arena. Race 2


== External links ==
Qplaze
NOMOC Publishing LTD