Stewart School, Cuttack is an Indian Christian school, located on Mission Road, Buxi Bazar in Cuttack, Odisha. Stewart School, Cuttack was founded in 1882 by the enterprise and generosity of Dr. William Day Stewart, a Civil Surgeon based at Cuttack.


== History and administration ==
Stewart School, Cuttack was founded in 1882 by the enterprise and generosity of Dr. William Day Stewart, a Civil Surgeon based at Cuttack. The school, which started in 1882, was re-christened Stewart School in 1919 after its founder William Day Stewart, a civil surgeon. 
Stewart School began as the Orphanage School in November 1882. Soon, it came to be known as Protestant European School (in 1891) and in the same year its doors opened to Indian students. In 1910, the school was recognized as a Higher Elementary School by the Inspector of European Schools, Bihar and Orissa. The name of the school was altered to Stewart School, Cuttack, to perpetuate the name of its Founder, Dr. Stewart. In the year 1924 the school was confirmed in the status of Junior Secondary School and the Cambridge Syndicate sanctioned the opening of a center for Cambridge Examinations in the school. In the year 1974, the school was affiliated to CISCE, New Delhi. Stewart School, Cuttack is an Ango-Indian School and its Principal is the State's only non-official representative on the Inter-State Board for Ango-Indian Education.
The school is under the management of the Diocese of Cuttack, Church of North India. The principal is Mr F.C.North.
There are five Stewart Schools in Odisha under the management of the Diocese of Cuttack. Stewart School, Cuttack, is the oldest among the five. It consistently has students figuring in the top ten of Eastern India Indian Certificate of Secondary Education schools.
Apart from the school, there is a college named Stewart Science College. It is affiliated with the Council of Higher Secondary Education, Odisha.
The Stewart School, Cuttack is a Christian Minority Educational Institution, which is being managed by the Managing Committee of the School. It is a Charitable Un-Aided Minority Educational. It does not receive any kind of financial assistance from the state either for development, maintenance of infrastructure or towards the salary of the staff. The sole income of the school is from the fees collected from the parents. It runs on no profit. The Stewart School, Cuttack is affiliated to the ICSE council, New Delhi and has received the Minority Status Certificate on 26 February 2009 from the National Commission for Minority Educational Institution (NCMEI), Government of India, New Delhi vide F. No. 1568 of 2008-3415.


== Motto ==
The motto is Domini Timor Prima Sapientia ("Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom") from Psalm 111:10, the Bible.


== Staff and students ==
The school has 2,500 students and 80 teachers.


== Affiliations ==
The school is affiliated to Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations, New Delhi.


== Campus and facilities ==
The school is housed in an imposing complex of double-storeyed buildings. Spacious and airy classrooms, broad corridors, well-equipped laboratories, computer lab, an impressive  centenary hall and a first class library-cum-reading room make the school learner-friendly. Well-laid out lawns in front and vast play grounds create an ambiance required for siphoning off pressures of academic pursuit. An affable and dedicated tribe of teachers make the school a second home for the school children.


== Student life ==
Student life includes sports, National Cadet Corps (NCC), cultural activities, school youth festival, monthly quizzes, seminars, debates, exhibitions on philately, numismatics, environment, and science.


=== Sports and extra-curricular activities ===
Every year the school has a sports day in which the five houses participate. The five houses are:

There are inter-house competitions including debates, songs, recitations, spelling bees to arise a competitive spirit. All children from the houses participate in the annual sports meet and are rewarded for meritorious performance.
The school has the facility of many games like football, badminton, volleyball, cricket. Every year school selects the players for each game to form a team for inter-school tournaments.


=== National Cadet Corps ===
In November 1948, NCC (Junior) was formed in the school and is associated with 1(O) Med. Coy. of the Cuttack, N.C.C. Directorate. The school boasts of having the maximum representation of Junior Division cadets in the annual Republic Day Camp at New Delhi during the month of January from the Odisha Directorate.
There are nine ranks:

Every year, an NCC troop from the school represents 1(O) Med. Coy. in the Republic Day parade and Independence Day parade. Every year till 2000 it won both parades. Other victories are:


== Notable alumni ==
Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose – founder of the Indian National Army; born in Cuttack; studied in the school till class seven
Ajit Jain - Vice Chairman of Insurance Operations for Berkshire Hathaway
Ranjib Biswal - former Indian cricketer and the former Chairman of Indian Premier League


== See also ==

Christianity in Odisha
Education in Odisha
List of schools in Odisha


== External links ==
stewartschoolctc.in, the school's official website
dioceseofcuttackchurchofnorthindia.org, the website of the Cuttack Diocese