The Grand Mansion Gate (Chinese: 大宅门) is a 2001 Chinese historical television series written and directed by Guo Baochang. Guo is also the author of the original novel of the same name. The television series stars Siqin Gaowa, Chen Baoguo, Liu Peiqi, Du Yulu, He Saifei, Jiang Wenli, and Zhang Fengyi.Screenwriter Guo Baochang spent over 40 years writing the script for film. Guo had sole discretion with the early script, and eventually wrote approximately 4 drafts. The television series began production in 2000 and finished filming in 2001. It picks up the story of the rise and fall of the time-honored brand "Baicao Hall" and the frustrations and fates of three generations of the Bai family.The series premiered on CCTV-1 on 15 April 2001 in mainland China and then broadcast in Hong Kong on June 4.


== Synopsis ==
In 1880, namely the 6th year of Guangxu period of the Qing dynasty, Baicao Hall, a prominent merchant family in Beijing, Mrs. Bai (Bai Wen Shi, Siqin Gaowa) gives birth to a boy. His grandpa names him Bai Jingqi (Chen Baoguo). Bai Yingxuan (Bi Yanjun) takes Princess's doctor and offends His Royal Highness Zhan. Bai Yaping (Li Ping), daughter of Bai Mengtang (Du Yulu), frightened and accidentally killed her only one-year-old son, his husband Guan Shaoyi (Bai Yang) takes his wife off. From then one, the Bai family was at deep enmity with the other two families. 


== Cast ==


=== Main ===
Siqin Gaowa as Mrs. Bai (Bai Wen Shi) (白文氏), wife of Bai Jingxuan. The manager of the Bai family.
Chen Baoguo as Bai Jingqi (白景琦), son of Mrs. Bai and Bai Jingxuan. The manager of the Bai family.
Liu Cihang as Bai Jingqi in childhood.
Wang Bing as younger Bai Jingqi.
Liu Peiqi as Bai Yingyu (白颖宇), the third son of Bai Mengtang, he is a toff at first and dies for the motherland in the end.
Du Yulu as Bai Mengtang (白萌堂), father of Bai Yingyu.
He Saifei as Yang Jiuhong (杨九红), a concubine of Bai Jingqi. She is a prostitute before marrying to Bai Jingqi.
Zhang Fengyi as Ji Zengbu (季宗布), a military officer in the Royal Guard Divine Engine Division, teacher of Bai Jingqi, he is killed by the Germans.
Wang Liyuan as Mrs. Bai (Bai Zhou Shi) (白周氏), wife of Bai Mengtang.


=== Supporting ===
Ai Liya as Bai Yufen (白玉芬), daughter of Bai Yingyuan.
Geng Sisi as young Bai Yufen.
Zhao Yi as Bai Jingye (白敬业), the elder son of Bai Jingqi and Huang Chun.
Jiang Wen as magistrate of Jinan (济南府抚台大人).
Li Xuejian as Master Yu (于八爷), a drug dealer in Beijing.
He Qun as Pitou'er (皮头儿), a worker at a pawnshop.
Ning Jing as Zhen'er (珍儿), madam of the brothel.
Zhao Kui'e as Empress Dowager Cixi.
Zhang Yimou as Li Lianying.
Li Hongtao as Bai Yingyuan (白颖园), elder son of Bai Mengtang, an imperial physician.
Li Xinmin as Zhan Yu (詹瑜), son of His Royal Highness Zhan.
Zhang Qian as Manager Hu (胡总管), father of Little Hu.
Guo Dongwen as Huzitou (胡子头), Bai Jingqi's servant.
Bi Yanjun as Bai Yingxuan (白颖轩), Bai Mengtang's second son.
Li Ping as Bai Yaping (白雅萍), Bai Mengtang's youngest daughter.
Zhang Yan as Mrs. Bai (Bai Fang Shi) (白方氏), Bai Yingyu's wife.
Ru Ping as Huang Chun (黄春), Bai Jingqi's wife.
Chen Lingyue as young Huang Chun.
Jiang Wenli as Bai Yuting (白玉婷), Bai Yingxuan's youngest daughter.
Ma Sichun as young Bai Yuting.
Zhang Dinghan as Bai Jiali (白佳莉), Bai Jingqi and Yang Jiuhong's daughter, she was raised by her grandma.
Xia Desheng as Wei Heqing (魏鹤卿), an imperial physician.
Wang Linian as Master Yan (严爷), the Castellan.
Gang Limin as Teacher De (德先生), teacher of Bai family's old-style private school.
Zhang Shaohua as Ma Liqiu (马立秋), Li Xiangxiu's mother.
Zhang Jinghai as the boss of Tianjin Gambling House (天津赌局老板).
Zhao Xiaopi as Zheng Laopi (郑老屁), a servant in the Bai family.
Liu Feng as Official Shen (申大人).
Zhang Xinyong as Master Tu (涂二爷).
Guo Baochang as Shen Shuren (沈树仁), a doctor in Xi'an.
Li Xiaolei as Bai Jinglu (白景陆), Bai Yingyuan's third son.
Chen Weiyou as young Bai Jinglu.
Zhu Jianping as Wu Baosheng (乌宝生), a farmer in Hu County.
Liu Chao as Bai Jingwu (白景武), Bai Yingyu's second son, killed by Japanese fighters in Chongqing.
Wang Chaoqun as young Bai Jingwu.
Du Xudong as Han Rongfa (韩荣发), a local riffraff.
Huang Zhizhong as Huang Li (黄立), Huang Chun's brother.
Bai Qiulin as Shi Yuanxiang (石元祥), a worker in Longjiao House.
Zhang Haiyan as Jin Lian (金莲).
Fu Hongjin as Manager Mao (毛总管).
Ge Zhixing as Master Yu (于大爷).
Su Ke as Lu Guangyi (路广义).
Ma Zengshou as Mr. Bei (贝师爷), a private adviser.
Zhang Zhaobei as Bing Kuan (秉宽).
Guo Shaoxiong as Li Manfu (李满福), Li Chunxiu's father.
An Sheng as Yang Yizeng (杨益增), Yang Jiuhong's brother.
Zhou Zhonghe as Zhan Kuixi (詹奎禧), Zhan Yu's son, Guan Xianglian's husband.
Cao Kongli as Niu Huang (牛黄), a carter.
Liu Dan as Ku Ju (苦菊), Bai Yuting's servant girl.
Ma Zijun as Chen Yuesheng (陈月升), a Peking Opera actor.
Li Yusheng as Qi Futian (齐福田), a Peking Opera actor.
He Yongsheng as Taki Aoi (田木青一), a Japanese businessman.
Yuan Yaxuan as He Luofu (何洛甫), Bai Jiali's husband, a military officer in the Guangzhou Revolution Army and died in the Northern Expedition War.
Liu Bo as Zamao'er (杂毛儿), a worker in the brothel.
Jin Shuyuan as Huai Hua's mother (槐花之母).
Sun Wanqing as Che Laohui (车老回), carter of the Zhan family.
Wei Ran as Guan Xiangling (关香伶), Bai Yaping's daughter.
Yao Miao as the young Guan Xiangling.
Lei Kesheng as Wang Xiguang (王喜光), a former eunuch in the Royal Palace of Qing Empire.
Yuan Zi as young Wang Xiguang.
Zhang Jing as Guaizi (拐子).
Hun Yuchun as Zhu Shun's mother (朱顺之母).
Bai Yang as Guan Shaoyi (关少沂), Bai Yaping's former husband.
Chen Kaige as an official in the local government.
Tian Zhuangzhuang as Taki Aoi's father (田木之父), a Japanese military officer.
Shen Junyi as Kawano Osa (河野大佐), a military officer in the Kwantung Army.
Lei Juan as Huai Hua (槐花), Bai Jingqi's concubine.
Hou Yong as Nakamura (中村), a soldier in the Kwantung Army.
Yu Rongguang as Bai Hua.
Han Ying as Mrs. Han (Han Zhang Shi) (韩张氏), Zhu Shun's godmother.
Zhao Lingqi as Mrs. Bai (Bai Yin Shi) (白殷氏), Bai Yingyuan's wife.
Zhang Shen as Prince Wu (武贝勒), Huang Chun's father.
He Xiaoshu as mother of His Royal Highness Zhan (老福晋).
Lu Jixian as His Royal Highness Zhan (詹王爷).
Jia Ni as Princess (达格格), elder daughter of His Royal Highness Zhan, Huang Chun's mother.
Deng Limin as An Fu (安福), manager of the mansion of His Royal Highness Zhan.
Tan Yunshou as Manager Fan (范掌柜).
Sheng Caixin as Master Zhao (赵五爷).
Jiang Yishou as Chen San'er (陈三儿), carter of the Bai family.
Lu Donglai as Datou'er (大头儿).
Shen Xuebin as Zhu Shun (朱顺), the Castellan.
Sun Deli as Dong Daxing (董大兴), a drug dealer in Beijing.
Ren Mingsong as Jin Hua (金花), Bai Zhou Shi's servant girl.
Huang Zongluo as eunuch Chang (常公公), a eunuch in the Royal Palace of Qing Empire.
Huo Fufu as Qiu'er (球儿)
Song Linlin as Father Rong (容神父), a priest.
Sun Zhenlin as Old Huang (黄老汉), Huang Chun and Huang Li's foster father.
Pan Guangju as Mr. Xu (许先生), a pharmacist in Baicao Hall.
Li Qiang as Mr. Wei (韦先生).
Li Shusheng as Bai Jingsi (白景泗), Bai Yingyuan's second son.
Wu Jianing as young Bai Jingsi.
Jia Xinguang as Bai Jingyi (白景怡), Bai Yingyuan's elder son, an imperial physician.
Xu Boping as young Bai Jingyi.
Teng Minghui as Da Yanzei (大眼贼), a servant in the Bai family.
Shang Ying as Wu Cuigu (乌翠姑), Bai Jingyi's wife, Wu baosheng's daughter.
Cheng Xiangyin as Bai Jingshuang (白景双), Bai Yingyu's elder son.
Liu Zhibing as monk Huineng (慧能和尚), a Buddhist monk.
Zhou Zongyin as Sun Wantian (孙万田), boss of Sunji Jiaozhuang.
Ma Jun as Manager Wu (吴掌柜), boss of a pawnshop.
Yu Liwen as Manager Lyu (吕掌柜), boss of Lyuji Jiaozhuang.
Wang Huquan as Dong Sheng (冬生)
Yu Youchuan as Wangba Gunzi (王八棍子), a worker in the brothel.
Liang Xiao as Lu Xiaota (路小塔), Bai Yufen and Lu Guangyi's son.
Zhe Jianxia as Hong Hua (红花), the servant girl of Yang Jiuhong.
Song Xiaochuan as Wan Xiaoju (万筱菊), a Peking Opera actor.
Zhu Decheng as the labour contractor (包工头).
Han Yueqiao as He Yun (何芸), He Luofu's aunt.
Xie Lan as Li Xiangxiu (李香秀), Bai Jingqi's second wife, a former servant girl of Bai Wen Shi.
Zhong Weihua as Zhu Fu (朱伏), Li Xiangxiu's cousin.
Bai Xuwen as Guan Jingshan (关静山), Guan Shaoyi's son, a military officer in the Beiyang Army.
Wang Yang as Lian Xin (莲心), Bai Jingqi's servant girl.
Zhang Yang as Bai Jinggong (白敬功), Bai Jingqi's second son.
Ji Baozhong as Bai Jingsheng (白敬生), Bai Jingyis elder son.
Liu Su as Bing Pian (冰片)
Liu Bing as Feng Liu'er (冯六儿), the cook of the Bai family.
Jiang Yiming as Little Hu (小胡总管), Master Hu's son.
Liu Lingzhi as Bai Zhanyuan (白占元), Bai Jingye's elder son.
Qi Wei as Ying Zi (英子).
Gao Zhixing as the landlord (房东).


== Production ==


=== Conception and development ===
In 1959, at the age of 19, Guo Baochang entered Beijing Film Academy and began to write the novel The Grand Mansion Gate. He said that he thought hard since the age of 16 before he began to write the novel. At the dawn of the Cultural Revolution, he was labeled as a "reactionary student" and was sent to Nankou Farm of Beijing to reform through labour. In order to avoid the attention of the Red Guards, he burned the original manuscript. In March 1969 he began to rewrite the novel. In 1980 he divorced with his wife and his novel was burned by the furious woman. At the end of 1994, he began to rewrite the novel in the third times.Baicao Hall (百草厅) took inspiration from Tong Ren Tang, one of the time-honored pharmaceutical company in China founded at the beginning of the Qing dynasty and lasted for almost 350 years. Guo Baochang had lived there for more than 26 years.
The main character Bai Jingqi was inspired by Yue Jingyu (乐镜宇), the foster father of Guo Baochang. The character Bai Yuting was inspired by Guo's twelfth aunt.


=== Casting ===
Directors Zhang Yimou, Chen Kaige, He Qun and Tian Zhuangzhuang joined the cast. Actors Yu Rongguang, Li Xuejian, Ning Jing and Lei Kesheng were cast in supporting roles for the series.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography started in 2000 and wrapped in 2001. 


== Music ==


== Broadcast ==
The Grand Mansion Gate was broadcast in mainland China in April 2001 and two months later was aired in Hong Kong.


== References ==


== External links ==
The Grand Mansion Gate on IMDb
The Grand Mansion Gate at Douban (in Chinese)
The Grand Mansion Gate at the Mtime.com (in Chinese)